Three submissions done.
I recognize Anna Mu, we've seen her before.
That'll be good to catch up again. Are we, we are muted now.
Yep. Reach out so slightly too fast.
Um, oh, thank you.
I will, uh, well, we might start
with three 50.
Dr. McLaren, what a great last name,
aside from the Formula One this weekend.
Um, welcome. We've got 10 minutes, uh, set aside from you.
So we'll just let you get into it.
You might like to be some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's about a minute to run.
Um, welcome.
Awesome. Thank you so much. Can you hear me okay? Yes,
We can. Great.
Okay. I'm on rural internet, uh, here in the wapa,
so let me know if that changes.
Um, so Koto, my name is Lisa McLaren.
Um, and I'm submitting on behalf
of the Climate Justice Organization, three 50 Alterra,
where I'm currently in a co-director role.
Uh, I have to, I'm going to read from my notes today.
Um, only getting two days notice to present is, um, kind of
a bit, uh, too much, uh, last minute for me,
but I'm really happy to be speaking to all nonetheless.
Um, so I'll take a written submission as read
and, um, just try
and expand on a, a few key points around the role
of local government and also, uh,
what climate action means at the local government level.
Uh, so ma'am, background is a mix of climate activism, uh,
academia and local council work.
Um, I've actually been employed across four different local
council entities, uh, across my career to date, uh,
with work focused on emergency management,
community resilience, and climate change policy.
Um, and my last role in council was a senior policy advisor
around climate change and environment issues.
Uh, so I currently work, uh, as I mentioned
as a co-director at three 50 roa.
Um, and we support local groups to do amazing, uh,
climate advocacy and campaigning
and getting out amongst the communities
and doing some cool projects.
Uh, and I've also just finished a PhD, uh,
in emergency management, uh, on, uh, something that, uh,
some friends and I developed called the Zero Carbon Act.
Uh, hopefully you've heard of it, uh, climate law
that was passed back in 2019.
Uh, and so, yeah, I appreciate, uh,
your time today and hope that you will, uh, yeah, take our,
uh, thoughts into consideration
and take them quite seriously as this matters to a lot
of the people that we are representing today.
Um, so climate change action has never been in a better
place at local government level than in
the last sort of five years.
Um, after decades of continuous pressure from include up
staff, counselors, and community members, most councils
around the country have changed their narratives from
climate change, um, about climate change, sorry,
from apprehension and doubt to instead,
a steady determination that local government can
and should be taking a leading role, uh,
in community climate action.
Um, however, this proposed bill, uh, aims to stymie
that climate progress in the name of getting back to basics
and back to basics as proposed in this bill is kind
of a naive dream now, um, we're in a world filled with, um,
ever more increasingly terrifying climate realities.
And I don't mean that to be dramatic.
The the science is real, it's there.
And, um, what we are facing
and what our local communities are facing is getting, uh,
really, really dire.
Uh, so instead we think that getting back to basics, um,
should really mean delivering on community good
by creating spaces for communities to thrive,
and also supporting those local
initiatives that help them do so.
So council supporting community good to us
looks like libraries full
of young people learning about the world, safe, affordable,
accessible housing for all refugees, welcomed
and with access to local support services, support
for food banks and chi rescue rescue organizations,
accessible and affordable public transport
and great active transport links to, uh, we would like
to highlight, uh, that using the spill
to remove the full wellbeing mandate is, um,
is a serious hit to some
of the strategic forward thinking work
that our councils have been doing, especially
around issues like climate change.
So, as noted, climate change has been taken
seriously now by councils.
They know the science, they know how their particular
area will be impacted.
They can see those impacts now with their own eyes
and also with their own council budgets.
Um, they have work plans in place, um,
they have climate staff.
We need to be supporting them to keep that going.
So each time there is a massive storm
or flooding event on the news, I wonder how much worse, uh,
those communities are impacted because of climate change.
And luckily, we have climate scientists, uh,
world leading climate scientists who can tell us, uh,
exactly how much climate change has contributed
to those things, and they do not paint a pretty picture.
So, council funding
for community climate change initiatives does not come under
the core services as proposed by this bill.
However, climate change funding
provided to communities can have a wide range
of positive impacts beyond just climate
or environment things.
So we mentioned two, uh,
two different examples in our written submission.
So firstly, uh, funding for community projects, which aim
to increase the number of trees
or green space in our urban areas.
Um, we know that increasing, uh,
tree cover in those urban areas is great for biodiversity,
but it's also just great for people walking around.
I've, uh, driven through town in summer, really,
really hot summer days here in the wapa.
And the side of the pavement has the tall trees is the one
that everyone is walking along.
Uh, so in a changing climate, we are going
to need all the help we can get
to reduce temperatures in our towns
and cities to prevent the climate induced heat related
deaths and infrastructure failures that are sweeping
through other places around the world.
Um, by reducing community climate funding,
the bill would take away council's ability
to support this important work, which will only, um,
increase cost to our communities in the long run.
Uh, another example we gave was community owned energy,
which has the dual benefit of increasing local
electricity resilience, and also providing clean energy
to local households.
Um, we know that over 110,000 households cannot
afford to keep their homes warm.
Uh, with Maori and Pacific families,
hit the hardest Energy is a basic necessity.
Everyone deserves, uh, affordable, clean power,
which is why some, um,
of our amazing volunteers are also working on a, uh,
national energy plan campaign at the moment.
But this bill would reduce council's ability
to support those local initiatives, which would seek to
increase community owned generation.
Um, why would we want to make it harder for our communities
to become more resilient, especially in places where I live?
So I'm out in rural watered upper every time there is even a
small storm here we have the power flickering.
Our water is run by power.
Our septic system is run by power here.
We're pretty off grid, so, uh, for everything but power.
And so those sort
of little disturbances have a massive impact on us, um,
on our community around us.
Uh, so those are just two examples.
There's, uh, heaps more that could go into, uh, we know
that localized climate impacts are gonna need those local
solutions and councils are best place to do that work.
They know the local One
Minute remaining.
Cool. Thank you.
We know, uh, that, uh, councils know the people to go
to in their local area to make that difference.
Who can make that local infrastructure more resilience
with local knowledge?
Uh, so just if with my last minute,
um, I'd like to touch on
Questions.
Pardon? Can you just tell
If she wants a question?
She should stop now. Oh, w would, would you like to finish
or would you like to take a question
for your last sort of minute? It's up to you.
No, I'll just end on a statement. That's fine. Okay.
Um, sorry about the dog in the background.
Uh, so I just wanted to, uh, finish with the fact
that this bill also represents, uh, a continuation
of attacks against Te Ori
and T Maori, um, with this bill specifically
by the proposed removal of the requirement
to consider Tikanga Maori knowledge when appointing
directors of council controlled organizations.
Uh, um, yes, this is just a continuation
of the anti Maori rhetoric
that's been going on within this co, um,
within the government for the last, uh, two years.
But I'm really stoked to see a lot
of people fighting back against this, including, uh, one
of our local RA councils who put in a great submission,
shout out to the Cardin Council, who really,
it's definitely not a woke progressive lefty, um, sort
of place here, but they put in a really,
really strong submission,
and particularly on that point about just how, uh,
meaningful that engagement is
to them and to their community.
So I'd, uh, hope. Right,
Thanks for your, um, time and nice to join us.
We've now moved on to our next one, which is, uh, Dr.
Terence Loomis. Welcome, sir.
We've got five minutes for you and the floor is all yours,
Uh, killed up and good afternoon.
Yes, my name's, uh, Terence Loomis.
I, uh, just a bit of background about me.
I did my MA at Auckland University in, uh, anthropology,
my PhD at Adelaide University in economic anthropology,
and for a while as yt a university as Professor
of Development Studies.
Um, more recently in my semi-retirement, I've, um,
been an independent researcher
and particularly interested in, uh, climate change,
climate adaptation,
and I've done some consulting work, um,
primarily voluntarily with, uh,
with our local government here in Gisbon.
So, uh, with, with that background, uh, I'd just like
to summarize the, the gist of my submission, uh,
which is that there is no evidence that
re removing the four wellbeings from the purpose statement
and, uh, adding reference to economic development
and growth to council core services, uh, will,
uh, in the first instance, limit rate rises, uh,
improve council fiscal discipline or, and
or accelerate local economic development in themselves.
Uh, the bill supporting documents as well as analysts,
uh, analysis by expert commentators make this clear.
Uh, for example, I noted the DIA, uh,
review panel's comments in the 19, uh, sorry, 2024,
uh, cabinet document supporting papers, um,
which is rather scathing about the lack of of evidence.
I also point out in my submission that, uh,
there are some downside risks to
removing the wellbeing's framework from the purpose
and outcome statements.
In particular, I point out the fallacy
of relying on trickle down growth to achieve wellbeing for,
uh, society, and certainly, uh, including the environment.
Secondly, the hidden costs to communities
and the environment from narrowing the focus
of council business and, uh, and expenditure.
And thirdly, the potential abrogation
or contributing to the possible abrogation
of New Zealand's commitments
to the UN sustainable development goals.
So just, uh, to elaborate briefly on, on,
on those main points in my submission, SU supposedly,
according to the argument behind this legislative, uh, uh,
uh, proposal, councils are operating inefficiently.
Uh, they're costing rate payers lots of money,
and they're failing to promote economic development in
their, uh, locality or region
because they're required under current, uh,
local government law to take a holistic, sustainable
approach, uh, to their, to their operations.
But if the bill isn't supported by adequate evidence
and analysis, then it's a bit like, uh, I'm reminded of the,
the Wizard of Oz movie toward the end where, uh,
the curtain gets drawn
and it's this cranky old man with, uh,
with steam and so on.
Uh, all we're left with if there's no evidence
to support the assertions in this bill is the government's,
uh, going for growth framework,
which is the equivalent in this case of saying, trust us,
we know what's needed.
Um, getting a bit into my field, ecological economists,
economists for decades have pointed out the fallacies
of the growth paradigm and that economy
and human society are encompassed within, uh,
and dependent upon the global eco ecosystem, uh,
mainstream economists and government policy makers ignore
and have ignored this interdependency at their peril.
We've got one minute left.
The need for a more holistic approach was what led
to the development of the UN Sustainable Development Goals
Treasury work on, uh, wellbeing framework
and inform the groundbreaking old government act
with its four wellbeings.
Obviously, the world has changed since then,
and we have the acceleration of climate change,
and so we're now more aware than ever of the need
to take a holistic understanding.
Uh, to be blunt, we can't afford the consequences
of policies based on just going for growth at all costs.
Uh, we ignore the externality costs at our peril.
So in summary, without an adequate evidence base to support
the convoluted problem statements forming this bill,
it's just not adequate policymaking.
There's simply no justification for getting rid
of the four wellbeings.
Councils can still operate efficiently
with the additional measures in this bill
and take a balanced, sustainable development approach.
So my recommendation is that the, uh, bill be sent back
to the minister for rethinking
or preferably scrapped altogether. Uh, behalf, thank
You very much.
Uh, unfortunately we've gone over time,
but I appreciate you taking the time today.
We're gonna move to our next submitter at this point online,
which is Anna Mu.
Welcome. Anna, we have got, uh, five minutes for you
and the floor is all yours.
Okay, thank you. Uh, Koto Carta.
Um, I'm joining you, um, from Auckland.
Um, my written submission was relatively brief.
I proposed that the bill be improved by inserting references
to two legal entity concepts.
The first one is registered charity, um,
and the second one relates to body corporate entities
that govern unit title developments.
Um, I listened to some of the submissions this morning,
so I thought it might be helpful to pick up on one
of the comments by the local government professionals.
Um, they highlighted that the purpose
of local government statement in clause six
and the core services statement in clause seven, um,
both need to be reworked and aligned.
Um, so I agree with that.
Um, o on that, my, um,
second point about body corporates,
perhaps if I could refer you to clause six,
where it has the proposed replacement for Section 10, um,
and limb B of that talks about, um,
in a, in a way that is most cost effective for households
and businesses.
So I think that the reference to households
and businesses only is too simplistic.
Um, body corporates, um, um, are also,
um, an audience
or recipients that should be specifically referred
to in the legislation.
Um, the body corporate concept was established
by the Unit Titles Act of 1972.
Um, I purchased a unit title property in March this year,
and I'm surprised at some of the weaknesses in the central
and local government regulatory systems, um,
for those property structures.
Um, I wondered, does the committee have any
questions about the relevance
of body corporates being referred to?
Can you, can you just clarify for me?
Clause six is section five amended interpretation.
Oh, sorry, I might be looking at the wrong one.
I'm looking at, um, part one, I
thought it was clause six was about Section 10 replaced
purpose of local government.
Okay. Okay. I know that you're referring to, right?
I'll just scroll down to that. Okay, thank you.
Yeah. So yeah, so in that clause six,
it has section 10 replaced,
and then limb B of section 10 ends with the reference
to households and businesses.
So I think that's too simplistic as a summary of the groups
that receive local government's core services.
Now, I do have a question here.
We've got two minutes left. So I've got
a question from cli Wade Brown.
Thank you, Anna. It's a very interesting point you raised.
Um, I imagine the reason was that households
and businesses are the direct payers of rates,
but you think there are some other issues
that should be covered by the cost effectiveness analysis?
Do not think that's going to
actually end up being a very end expensive analysis
if we, I mean,
it's expensive enough if you just look at households
and businesses, if you add a few other entities in there,
it could tie up councils for a long time.
Um, no. So I agree with your point that the reference
to households and businesses only as representative,
I would say of the 19th century thinking
that is playing out in many of our parliamentary
and local authority contexts, body corporate, have, um,
been established by the registrar general
of land since 1972.
And it is time for local authorities, central government
to step up and design and implement systems.
So the people like me who are responsible
for governing body corporates can do
that in a coherent local and national context.
We've been overlooked for too long.
Nikki Kay did a lot of work to represent our interests.
Um, I used to volunteer for Nikki
and, um, very sad to lose her.
And so I guess I'm partly stepping into her shoes,
but also speaking on behalf of myself
and my neighbors, it's not good enough.
It's time for us to be recognized.
I'll just close out by saying that, um, land
and Information New Zealand confirmed last month
that there are just over 15,000
unit title developments in New Zealand.
Um, but Auckland Council has got no idea,
and that's really problematic
with the pressure on infrastructure, the relevance
of density of urban housing.
Um, they also need
to know which developments are apartment buildings
versus townhouses.
So yeah, it, yeah. Thank,
Thank you. And I'm sorry we're
out of time,
but I really appreciate a really specific
targeted submission
that gives us clear things to think about.
So I, I will go and have another look at that.
Thank you for your time.